Welcome to Dimension Reduction Algorithms.
After watching this video, you will be able to explain what Dimension Reduction Algorithms are.
You will also be able to describe the different types of Dimension Reduction Algorithms,
namely PCA, t-SNE, and UMAP.
Dimensionality Reduction Algorithms reduce the number of dataset features
without sacrificing critical dataset information.
High-dimensional data is often very difficult to analyze and visualize.
Dimensionality Reduction Algorithms simplify the dataset for machine learning models.
The Principal Component Analysis (or PCA),
T-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (or t-SNE),
and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (or UMAP)
algorithms transform original dimensions to create new features.
Principal Component Analysis, or PCA, is a linear dimensionality reduction algorithm
that assumes dataset features are linearly correlated.
It simplifies data, reduces dimensionality,
and reduces noise while minimizing information loss.
PCA can transform features into a new set of uncorrelated variables
called principal components while retaining as much variance as possible.
These principal components are orthogonal to each other
and define a new coordinate system for the feature space.
The principal components are organized in decreasing order of importance,
or how much of the feature space variance they explain.
The first few components often contain most of the information, while the rest tend to represent noise.
T-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding, or t-SNE,
maps high-dimensional data points to a lower-dimensional space.
It is good at finding clusters in complex, high-dimensional data that can be visualized
in two or three dimensions and works well with data like images and text.
t-SNE focuses on preserving the similarity of points that are close together
and less so on distant points.
Similarity is measured as proximity, using the distance between pairs of points.
Unfortunately, t-SNE doesn't scale well and can be difficult to tune,
as it is sensitive to its hyperparameters.
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection, or UMAP,
is also a nonlinear dimensionality reduction algorithm, often used as an alternative to t-SNE.
It constructs a high-dimensional graph representation of the data based on manifold theory, which
assumes that the data lies on a lower-dimensional manifold embedded in higher-dimensional space.
UMAP then optimizes a low-dimensional graph structure that best preserves the relationships
between points in the original data.
UMAP scales better than t-SNE and, in addition to the lower structure of the data, preserves
the global structure, often providing higher clustering performance than t-SNE.
Consider the 3D plots showing simulated data using the MakeBlobs function in Scikit-Learn.
The plots show the same 3D data from two different perspectives.
There is a little bit of overlap between the yellow and purple clusters,
while the other two blobs are distinctly separated from all blobs.
Let's apply the PCA, t-SNE, and UMAP dimension reduction algorithms to project this dataset
onto two dimensions and compare the results.
PCA has separated the blobs effectively.
The blobs are all normally distributed, and the only differences between them
are in their means and variances.
This means the blobs are linearly correlated, so it is expected that PCA will perform well
on the simulated data.
t-SNE has clustered the data into four clusters and mostly separated the blobs well.
The algorithm identified four very distinct clusters, with several mislabeled points within
the purple cluster from the green and yellow clusters.
This mixing is expected, as two of the clusters had a slight overlap.
Although UMAP didn't perfectly identify some of the blob points in the blobs,
you can see that three of the clusters did not fully separate.
In particular, the yellow and green clusters have a slight overlap with the purple cluster.
This should be the case for the yellow and purple clusters because these two clusters
were not fully separated to begin with in the 3D input data.
UMAP performed slightly better than t-SNE in this regard, since t-SNE identified four very distinct clusters.
In this video, you learned that dimensionality reduction algorithms reduce the number of
dataset features without sacrificing critical dataset information.
There are different types of dimensionality reduction algorithms, namely, PCA, t-SNE,
and UMAP.
PCA is a linear dimensionality reduction algorithm that simplifies data, reduces dimensionality,
and reduces noise while minimizing information loss.
t-SNE maps high-dimensional data points to a lower-dimensional space.
UMAP creates a low-dimensional representation of data by approximating the manifold on
which the data lies.